1 
 
Book Review 11: July 2017  
    Agricultural Extension in South Asia 
 
 
AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION IN KERALA:  
A SERVICE DELIVERY FRAMEWORK 
Dr. P Rajasekharan and Dr. C. Bhaskaran (2017),  
Kerala State Planning Board 
Trivandrum, Kerala, India 
 
 
 
Extension delivery system in Kerala is unique as it operates in a socio-economic and agrarian milieu that is 
quite different from the rest of the country, with a few elements that can be showcased globally as well. 
This has evolved along with the transitions in the agricultural sector in the state, which has witnessed 
several shifts in emphases. Quite possibly, these changes also reflect the direction in which the state’s 
primary section moves on. Growth pattern of agriculture in Kerala has been disturbing, with almost 
consistent downward trends in area and production. While productivity has shown increasing trends in 
almost all crops, profitability has been changing in response to the several externalities on which neither 
the state nor the farmers have had any sway. Needless to say, various parameters of agricultural growth 
show that the primary sector had been going through a phase of irreversible downturn, with the proportion 
of people involved in agriculture and the contribution to the state’s GDP decreasing day by day. Though this 
is in line with the national trends, the transition in Kerala has been drastic and fast.  
 
How has the extension delivery system, structurally and 
functionally, responded to these changes? Has it ever been able 
to influence the trajectory of this transition in any manner 
whatsoever? Or is it that the extension system is always 
invariably led by the changes in the external environment? How 
powerful and effective are the interventions by an extension 
system in slowing down this trend, if not reverse it?   Has the 
extension delivery system changed itself to take on these 
emerging challenges? It appears that the extension system can 
be viewed in two ways: one, as a self-evolving system in 
response to the greater external changes or two, as a tool to 
safeguard the concerns of the actors by minimising the impact 
of changes. Documenting the features of an extension system 
would require deeper and precise analysis of either one or both 
of these perspectives. Any historiographical description of the 
transition of agricultural extension should necessarily consider 
these concerns as it is important not only to understand the 
drivers of such changes, but also to design new strategies to 
influence them as much as possible.  
 
An incisive reading of the book ‘Agricultural Extension in Kerala: A Service Delivery Framework’ authored by 
Dr P Rajasekharan and Dr  C Bhaskaran, published by the Kerala State Planning Board, evokes a plethora of 
questions on the drivers of change in the agricultural sector and how best the extension delivery system 
has been able to address them. Though the book does not specifically attempt to document the phases of 
transition in agriculture and concomitant changes required in the extension strategies, it is heartening that 
it gives an unprecedented overview of the institutional changes in the extension delivery systems in Kerala 
2 
 
over a period of time. The book has documented these changes comprehensively and explained the 
contexts of resultant changes.  
 
The book characterises the agricultural sector in Kerala as ‘preponderant with miniscule sized holdings, 
diversified cropping patterns, predominance of perennial crops and homesteads based farming systems’. 
Historically, this is an outcome of a series of socio-political changes in the state, which are considered to 
have contributed to the accomplishments that have been showcased as ‘unparalleled’. The development 
model of Kerala is widely considered as ‘enigmatic’ since the higher indices of human development are not 
attributed to economic growth, unlike other developed economies. Kerala has a rather different paradigm 
of development, mainly anchored on equitable redistribution of public resources and supported by the 
prosperity created by remittance by migrants who are employed in the Middle East and other regions 
globally. The fact that the socio-economic development of Kerala has not been triggered by the growth in 
the productive sector, explains why agriculture has turned out to be a less important livelihood option. 
Agriculture, which had already been weakened by such changes, was further threatened by the onslaught 
of globalisation, with several multilateral agreements and policy changes impacting its growth 
retrogressively. Unregulated competition, price volatility and decreasing profitability have aggravated the 
crisis in the agricultural sector, forcing several farmers to seek new alternate options.  
 
 
 
There is a clear and succinct review of these changes by analysing the trends of agricultural growth since 
1960 and comparing it with the trends at the national level. An overview of agriculture in Kerala, presents a 
summary of the core issues in this sector. Skewed cropping pattern with emphasis on cash crops and 
drastic reduction of food crops, marginalization of holdings, price volatility, increase in cost of cultivation 
and declining livestock population have been identified as major issues. Figures relevant to Kerala have 
been judiciously used to illustrate the temporal pattern of changes in agriculture, which would help us 
understand the scenario better. The authors have also tried to come up with a few indicators that would 
describe the nature of agriculture in the state more vividly.  
 
The extension delivery framework for the state is contextualized by a systematic and concise review of the 
origin and evolution of extension as a discipline and praxis. In fact, extension science as a discipline that 
would help provide solutions to development problems through conscientization as defined by A W van 
den Ban has changed in terms of form and purpose over a few decades. The book rightly observes that 
extension approaches have changed according to the preferences of the funding agencies and the 
3 
 
immediate requirements of times. For instance, as the authors observe, extension during the 20th century 
has been centrally funded and top down in structure with the TOT model being increasingly replaced by 
participatory approaches. However, the theoretical underpinnings of these changes do not seem to have 
been explored in detail. I would love to believe that this omission has happened for fear of the enormous 
magnitude of the topic.  
 
These minor deliberate omissions notwithstanding, the book has brilliantly illustrated the diverse extension 
systems in developing economies and tried to relate the inferences to the emerging institutional 
arrangements for extension service delivery. Finding out a typology of extension service delivery based on 
different places and historical phases is quite interesting; as it would possibly prompt an avid observer to 
go deeper into the historical contexts of the transitions in agricultural extension.  Equally noteworthy is the 
historical description of the extension initiatives in India during the pre and post-independence periods. 
Though they are not exhaustively explained, it gives the reader a bird’s eye view of the series of 
developmental interventions that have shaped up the paradigm of agricultural development in the country. 
However, a student of extension history would like to know the logic of the evolution of development 
initiatives based on the learning from previous experiences.  
 
The progression of extension initiatives from the Economic Conference of Mysore (1914-18) to Etawah Pilot 
Project (1948) shows how the development perspectives, approaches and tools have changed during the 
pre-independence period and how they have contributed to the strategies of agricultural and rural 
development in independent India. Sad to say, the dynamics of this change in relation to the political 
transition in India has not been seriously understood by extensionists. However, the authors present the 
sequel to the development narrative of yesteryears, by briefly explaining the current initiatives, which are 
huge by scale and triggered by multiple agencies and actors. Similarly, the history and evolution of 
agricultural development and extension in Kerala has also been documented with rich evidences drawn 
from a wide range of authentic sources. Though the authors have exercised great caution in documenting 
the major historical milestones chronologically, emphasis seems to have been given to agriculture in the 
southern part of the state alone, with brief explanations of the contributions of some prominent rulers of 
Travancore. An account of similar interventions in Cochin and Malabar regions has not found a place in this 
section.  
 
 
 
 
It is against this exhaustively drawn up background, that the authors examine the extension delivery system 
in Kerala. The compilation of agricultural development and extension initiatives in Kerala across the twelve 
five year plans has turned out to be an exhaustive collection; a sure delight for any student of the 
development history of Kerala. Each five year plan has witnessed the design and implementation of a few 
development programmes reflecting the perspectives, concerns and priorities of the plan. It is an invaluable 
and unprecedented documentation as far as Kerala’s development history is concerned. This lengthy 
section carefully examines the extension interventions in the past with a focus on the critical factors of 
©George K Mathai  
People’s representatives play a very important role in agricultural development in 
Kerala. A scene from Onamthuruthu padashekaram under Neendur Krishi Bhavan 
4 
 
their success or failure. Alongside, the logic of establishing new institutional mechanisms to sustain the 
positive outcomes of past systems has also been explained convincingly. The authors’ narrative on 
integrating the positive elements of the Training and Visit (T&V) system and a few other externally funded 
projects during that period into the new paradigm of ‘integrated development and extension’ at the 
grassroots level (by means of establishing an exclusive ‘Krishibhavan’ in every gram panchayat) is a telling 
example of the continuity and coherence of ideas maintained throughout the book.  
 
Transition of an existing paradigm to a much evolved new system as signified in the collapse of the T&V 
system provides us with several lessons on the need to design new institutional arrangements for extension 
delivery. The interactivity between extension agency and farming community had increased in the T&V 
system, but it was not necessarily participatory in its approach. It was in this very place, Krishibhavan was 
prospectively established as the hub of agricultural development in a gram panchayat, expecting greater 
intensity of contact with farmers, participation of stakeholders and adoption of group approaches in 
resource management. The uniqueness of this system is its organisational setup; which includes an 
Agricultural Officer, who is compulsorily a graduate in agriculture, leading a small team of three agricultural 
demonstrators.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Director of Agriculture Mr George K Mathai (Ettumanoor Block) with Agricultural Officer Smt.Arya .V.C 
and her team of Agricultural Assistants (Smt. Sabitha, Smt. Aswathy and Sri. Rajeesh)  
and Mrs.Abitha, Block Technology Manager, ATMA 
 
Krishibhavans, since their inception in 1987, played a pivotal role in supporting agricultural development in 
the state. These institutions have grown into the primary referral points of the farmers for access to 
information, inputs as well as services. Over a period of three decades, the roles of Krishibhavans have 
multiplied, with several programmes designed around this hub. Of all these changes, introduction of 
decentralized planning programme consequent to the 73rd and 74th constitutional amendments had been 
the most significant one, which radically transformed these institutions functionally. It is hailed as a unique 
institutional arrangement to facilitate planning of development programmes at the local level, with 
mandatory supply of funds, transfer of development agencies and redeployment of personnel to the three 
tier local self-government institutions. An ardent student of development history of Kerala, however, would 
expect something more. Analysis of the functional and administrative changes brought about by 
decentralization and its implication on extension delivery could have been elaborated further, as it would 
have given more insights on the nuances of participatory planning and development envisaged in 
democratic decentralization. Still, the section on the history and evolution of agricultural development and 
extension in Kerala is lucidly written, with incisive description of ATMA programmes and various other 
interventions designed and customised at the behest of the State Planning Board, to strengthen the 
©George K Mathai  
5 
 
extension service delivery in Kerala. These programmes are aptly described by the authors as alternate 
model of extension beyond T&V system and ATMA.  
 
The book showcases the context and evolution of the prestigious LEADS (Lead farmer centred extension 
advisory and delivery services) programme, which has attracted national attention as a hybrid version of 
the constructive components of several previous experiments in extension service delivery. Undoubtedly, 
the success of LEADS as an approach and strategy deserves to be explored further by extension experts in 
the country. The programme acknowledges the significance of reaching out to farmers more intensely 
through peer group dynamics and addressing specific issues by providing customised solutions. It also 
envisages providing support to farmers viz. credit linkage, periodic review of field problems by Monthly 
Technical Advice (MTA) sessions, conscientization through demonstrations, etc.  
 
The most important and conspicuous outcome of this intervention had been the evolution of ATMA PLUS, 
an institutional arrangement to overcome the limitations of ATMA. The need to customize ATMA by 
considering state level characteristics had been a long standing demand by many extension scientists and 
policy thinkers. As the authors argue, funds from ATMA had been grossly inadequate to meet the specific 
requirements of the state. ATMA PLUS has rendered ATMA more effective by adding new mandates and 
additional funds for forming groups, mobilising resources and creating innovative learning situations at the 
field level. More importantly, this approach also involves formulation of location specific development 
programmes under the aegis of local self-governments, enabling seamless integration with decentralized 
planning.  
About 60% of the total enterprises established by Kudumbasree  
(State Poverty Eradication Mission, Kerala) are in the livestock sector.  
 
The book is to be lauded specifically for attempting a review of the impact of extension services in Kerala. 
The book also explains the good extension practices followed in ATMA and SAMETI, many components of 
which are worth emulating elsewhere. It is heartening that the authors have seriously addressed the issue 
of continuing agricultural education for various stakeholders, by brilliantly presenting the need to enhance 
the capability of the extension work force to take on new challenges. The list of core competencies 
required by extension professionals in the state and the institutional arrangements for imparting them are 
going to be eye openers for administrators. By the way, this would also remind the reader of the need to 
include new domains and methodologies of extension research that is much required to provide theoretical  
support to the practitioners of this ‘new’ paradigm of extension. The book does not leave out this concern 
either. Surprisingly, though not very deep and exhaustive, the book in its eleventh chapter gives clear 
theoretical perspectives on emerging challenges in agricultural extension in Kerala. This chapter gives a few 
indications of the prospects of trying out market led extension, issues and implications of privatizing 
extension and linking smallholders with value chain. These observations would, in all likelihood, be 
prophetic; as agriculture in Kerala is geared to try out several such innovations as a means to survive and 
sustain.  
 
©Sreeram Vishnu 
6 
 
There is also an elaborate description of the ICT initiatives in agricultural extension, developed by various 
agencies in Kerala to support extension service delivery. As an appropriate and out-and-out conclusion to 
the logic and narration followed in the book, a progressive phase of the evolution of extension is deftly 
presented as a new framework and model of agricultural extension and service delivery in Kerala, in the 
concluding chapter. Termed as ASDP (Agricultural Extension and Service Delivery Project), this new project 
is envisaged as a comprehensive strategy, addressing all major concerns, pertinent to Kerala’s agriculture. 
The proposed model includes natural resource management, credit linkage, diagnostic services, market 
linkage, social capital, mechanisation, input supply, eco-friendly and sustainable management of crops, etc, 
as spokes of the central theme of agricultural extension services. But quite convincingly, the prospects of 
employing this new model are not grounded on any unrealistic notions. It is firmly based on the 
experiences drawn from the successful cases and pilot programmes implemented across the state. Details 
of these cases are presented vividly, though they are brief and crisp. Illustrating the efficacy of these cases 
seemed refreshing.  
 
Finally, what is the impression left behind? Comprehending the innumerable dimensions of the complex 
process of extension delivery has been attempted with an air of ease and élan. The book is a treasure house 
of new insights on extension service delivery in changing times. This is not only because of the compilation 
of even the subtle details of these new experiments, but also on account of the objectivity in drawing 
inferences and the invigorating style in which they are presented. Unlike the usual genre of books in 
extension, this goes down to the finer details of extension praxis, in a different socio-economic and political 
milieu. It touches upon every relevant thing in the framework of extension service delivery and does not 
leave out anything. However, the book opens up an exciting scope for a voluminous documentation of the 
evolution of extension delivery systems in every state, I would say, in the form of a monograph. Presenting 
the socio-political, economic and the historical backdrop in which any extension system would evolve and 
transform, would still remain a big challenge, as is evident in this work too.  
 
 
 
 
 
Dr Jiju P Alex is Professor, Agricultural Extension, at the Kerala Agricultural University, 
Trichur, Kerala ( jijupalex@hotmail.com ) 
 
 
 
