 
1
Kerala State Organic Farming Policy, Strategy and Action Plan 
 
Vision 
Make Kerala’s farming sustainable, rewarding, and competitive, ensuring poison-free 
water, soil and food to every citizen.  
Background  
India has a glorious history of farming, starting probably from the 6th millennium BC 
in the Indus Valley, harnessing the annual floods and the subsequent alluvial deposits. The 
Indus Valley Civilization was founded on sustainable farming practices. Subsequently, 
our culture and ethos became reflections of the agricultural practices and it became 
mutually inseparable till recently. Harvest of the main crops is celebrated through out the 
country. 
In Kerala, it went to the extent of identifying the farmland with Mother God or a 
female. Just like the female has to take rest after delivery, the farm land has also to be 
given rest for three months after the harvest; tilling is strictly prohibited during this 
period. Although it may look superstitious, the ecological reason behind this ritual is that 
tilling during monsoon leads to severe soil erosion and thus, is an unsustainable practice. 
Therefore, sustainability has been the hallmark of our farming system from time 
immemorial; growing the time tested, weather suited, traditional crops with or without 
additional organic inputs, but deeply interwoven with the ecological systems and climatic 
conditions. 
The once flourished Pokkali cultivation in the coastal districts and the Kaipad farming 
system in Kannur district are testimonials to man’s ingenuity in harnessing the 
natural events for farming, that too integrated farming, without affecting the natural 
ecological processes and without even any external inputs. 
However, the so called modern agriculture-unmindful of the ecosystem principles so 
revered and practiced for centuries-led to seemingly irrevocable ecological and 
environmental catastrophes in the country. The Green Revolution essentially replaced the 
traditional varieties with high-yielding ones. These high yielding varieties now recognized 
as ‘high input varieties’ needed tonnes of fertilizers, to achieve the target growth. The crops 
and varieties alien to the soil attracted new pests and diseases and also outbreaks of existing 
pests. To combat them, came in huge quantities of pesticides. Input of these "exotic" 
elements into the traditional farming led to multitude of environmental issues.  
The microorganisms declined; the soil lost its fertility and vitality; water demand 
increased and, the time tested traditional varieties disappeared. In short, the century old 
practices came to a halt. The eternal relationship between the farmer and farm land was 
lost. More importantly, sustainability of the agriculture systems collapsed, cost of 
cultivation soared, income of farmers stagnated and, food security and food safety became 
a daunting challenge.  
 
2
Biodiversity in the agricultural fields has now become a history of the past. The 
farmland became silent; devoid of the croak of frogs, chattering of warblers, whistling of 
Whistling Ducks. The long tubular straw striven nests of the Baya weaver bird hanging on 
the fronds of palm-a once spectacular sight-have disappeared from most localities. The 
insectivorous birds such as drongo, bee-eater, even the house sparrow became rare or 
locally extinct, indicating the collapse of the entire food webs of the farm land.  
In the forestry sector, fortunately the use of pesticides has been much less. However, 
the aerial spraying of pesticides in India was first tried in Kerala in 1965 to control the teak 
defoliators in Konni forest division. It was noted that with in 48 hours nearly 162 non-
target species of arthropods were knocked down.  
The mentally and physically retarded and handicapped children in Padri village in 
Kasergod tell the world in unequivocal terms the tragedies and disasters that aerial spraying 
of pesticides could inflict on human life.   
As a result of all these "modern" techniques, the air, water and the soil were polluted; 
most food grains and farm products were contaminated by pesticides. The run off from the 
farm land contaminated the wetlands - rivers, tanks, ponds, reservoirs, lakes and all water 
bodies-and the life in them. Fishes carried high levels of pesticides and also heavy metals, 
the latter as a result of the many chemical industries that sprang up to provide chemical 
fertilizers.  
Health hazards became unimaginably high. Incidence of fatal diseases rose. Hospitals 
with modern amenities came up in the cities as profit making industries. Pharmaceuticals 
flourished.  
Food crops became non-attractive, while cash crops became more remunerative. Rice 
fields have been filled up for non-agricultural activities. The area under cash crops 
expanded during the last 20 years (16% under rubber alone), while that under food crops 
plummeted (to just 9% of the total cultivated area).  The monoculture of such economically 
valuable crops led to soil erosion and loss of soil fertility to a great extent. The advent of 
chemical intensive farming and its prevalence in Kerala for the past 50 years have resulted 
in the near stagnant levels of productivity of many of these economically important crops 
such as coconut, cashew, pepper, coffee, tea, cardamom and arecanut. Besides these, many 
regions in Kerala, like Wayanad started facing acute water scarcity. The State has taken 
note of it and given priority in the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  
Over and above, the economic liberalization and WTO policies added to the woes of 
the farmers by bringing down the prices of agriculture commodities. They are caught in the 
debt trap owing to the loan taken to meet the high cost of farming, as it demanded more 
external inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides and water. These led to increasing instances of 
suicide by farmers.  Investment in agriculture has essentially changed from the farmer to 
the industries supplying input to the farmer, and as a direct consequence, net income for 
farmers decreased while the industries supporting agriculture in the country flourished.  
The national policies of opening retail sector to national and multinational companies 
pose great threat to our food sovereignty and right to safe food. The enhanced ‘food miles’ 
 
3
led to increased carbon emission, further increasing the load of green house gases. The 
potent danger of introducing Genetically Modified crops, monopoly of seeds by national 
and multinational corporate bodies could very well be the last straw on the camel’s back for 
the farmers of Kerala.  
Many farmers have realized   that they are fighting a loosing battle with the "high yield 
variety - fertilizer-pesticide pack" of Green Revolution. They have also realized that the 
degradation and disruption of the fragile ecosystems of the ‘God’s own country’ are the 
chief culprits for the water scarcity, nutritional insecurity, loss of primary productivity and 
agrarian crisis being faced by the State.  
The farmers in Kerala are convinced that the only way is to return to the traditional 
sustainable ways of cultivation without harming the ecosystem. Thus the organic farming, a 
system with the broad principle of ‘live and let live’, came up which was recognized 
nationally and internationally.  
Organic agriculture is not limited to crop production alone, but encompasses animal 
husbandry, dairy, fisheries, poultry, piggery, forestry, bee keeping, and also uncultivated 
biodiversity around. 
By and large, there is an increasing awareness among the consumers also on the 
deleterious effects of pesticides and hence, there has been a high demand for organically 
cultivated food produces. Therefore it has become a solemn responsibility of the 
Government to encourage organic farming to ensure poison-free food at affordable price to 
every citizen.  
There have been demurs and doubts on the practicability of organic farming on the 
ground that the production would plummet and the country would once again be forced to 
yet another food crisis. This is quite unfounded. Success stories on high productivity of 
organic farming are now abundant. The Food and Agriculture Organization reports at the 
International Conference on Organic Agriculture and Food Security 2007 as follows: 
"Conversion of global agriculture to organic management, without converting wild lands 
to agriculture and using -fertilizers, would result in a global agricultural supply of 2640 
to 4380 kcal/person/day. Sustainable intensification in developing countries through 
organic practices would increase production by 56 per cent. Organic yields on average are 
comparable to conventional yields; although yields do decline initially when converting 
from high-input systems and almost double when converting from low-input systems". It 
also has found that organic farms use 33 to 56 per cent less energy per ha than conventional 
farms.   
Worldwide, as of now, more than 22.81 million hectares of land area is managed 
organically and the market of organic food is around $30 billion. It may be noted that 
Cuba, a country with 42,402 sq. miles of land and with 11.3 million people, is completely 
organic.  
 
 
 
4
A brief history of organic farming  
Pesticides have been in use in agriculture since Second World War and from the very 
beginning there have been concerns about the commercialization of chemical pesticides. 
Rachel Carson’s, "Silent Spring" published in 1964 brought out the scientific certainties of 
the impacts of pesticides on environment. Although DDT was banned in the developed 
world in the 1970’s, and its use in the agriculture fields of developing countries later, 
varieties of toxic pesticides found their way into the farms .The scientific predictions of 
Rachel Carson became true and the public, especially farmers and  scientists, the world 
over  realised the dangers of  pesticides. This led to the beginning of non-chemical farming. 
Researches and trials of traditional methods and also new models of soil and crop 
management began to appear. 
For the last 4-5 decades scientists have been trying to find out a sustainable agricultural 
system.  One of the prominent personalities among them was Sir. Albert Howard, the 
Advisor for Agriculture in India from 1905 to 1924.  "An Agricultural Testament", written 
by him, is considered to be the first authentic book on organic farming in India.  "Indoor 
method" in organic composting was also worked out first by him. 
The permaculture (permanent agriculture) experiments of Bill Mollison and Holmen in 
the 1970’s gave hope to many farmers the world over. The permaculture wave had its 
impact in Kerala too and since then many farmers have started experimenting this 
methodology and they found that this is one of the best practices for Kerala with its 
topographical peculiarities and high rainfall so as to conserve soil and water and improve 
productivity of their farms. 
In a report submitted in 1983 to the Department of Agriculture of the United States, 
Robert Papendick and James Parr, agriculture scientists of the same department, had 
emphasised the crucial need for focussing research on sustainable agriculture to replace the 
farming systems being followed using chemical pesticides and fertilizers.  
The infamous Bhopal tragedy of 1984 was an eye opener to a larger section of people 
in India and abroad. Discussion on alternatives began seriously. Publication of the book 
"One Straw Revolution" in 1984 by Masanobu Fukuoka (a Japanese scientist turned 
farmer), on his success in natural farming for the last half a century and, translation of his 
book into Malayalam in 1985 were timely in channelising such discussions in Kerala. 
Biodynamic farming was another method of organic farming which attracted many 
farmers.  
The very sustainability of agriculture assumed serious concern in the discussions 
among the farmers and organizations in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, Punjab and Kerala during the same period. The total external dependence of 
farmers for agriculture inputs had started affecting their economies leading to desperation 
among farming communities and ultimately to agrarian crisis. As an alternative, to make 
farming sustainable, Low External Input Sustainable Agriculture (LEISA) thus gained 
momentum in many places, especially sustainable among small and marginal farmers.  The 
agriculture   crisis that began in the late 1990s further strengthened this movement. Many 
 
5
individuals and organizations started interacting with farmers to make them understand the 
problems of the modern agriculture.  
Thus, from a simple beginning, organic farming later matured to such dimensions as 
women’s empowerment, seed conservation, development of seed banks, value addition 
and, more importantly, food and nutritional security. It took only 10-15 years for this 
transition and the results are encouraging. 
Currently there are a number of certified organic farmers in the state, those cultivating 
cash crops such as spices, tea, and coffee, mainly targeting export market and also non-
certified organic farmers who focus on food crops and biodiversity. All of them, whether 
certified or not, focus clearly on soil health improvement.  Kerala also has an accredited 
organic certifying agency catering to the needs of the farmers.  
Some of the farming systems such as Pokkali and Kaipad cultivation, cultivation of 
Jeerakasala and Gandhakasala varieties of paddy in Wayanad and, homestead farming 
systems all over the state are default organic. Studies have established the economic 
viability and productivity of homestead farms in the State and elsewhere. Recently the Adat 
panchayath in Thrissur district has started organic cultivation of rice in an area of 2,500 
acres, promoting integrated farming system, which is known as Adat model. Similarly 
Marappanmoola in Wayanad has another model organic farming system involving 
hundreds of farmers. 
 Marketing of organic produce is also being experimented in many places like Organic 
Bazaar in Thiruvananthapuram, Eco-shops in Thrissur and Kozhikode and, Jaiva Krishi 
Sevana Kendram in Kannur.  Self help groups of women are encouraged to undertake 
organic farming of vegetables in some panchayats.  
There is a rich potential for promoting organic farming in Kerala in the light that 
intensity of inorganic agriculture here is not that severe compared to that in other States in 
the country. While the national average consumption of fertilizers and pesticides during 
2002-2003 was 90kg/ha and 288g/ha respectively, it was only 60kg/ha and 224g/ha 
respectively in Kerala. This points to the positive side of agriculture in Kerala in terms of 
the already low levels of consumption of hazardous chemicals and, therefore, chances of 
redeeming farmers to organic agriculture are quite high. 
Realising the ground realities, the State Department of Agriculture commenced organic 
farming promotional activities since 2002-03. In the following year, the Department set up 
a cell for Promotion of Sustainable Agriculture and Organic Farming. It has also launched 
two brands, namely ‘Kerala Organic’ and ‘Kerala Naturals’ to market organic farm 
produces. Currently, about 7,000 farmers practice organic farming in the State as per NPOP 
standards, covering a total area of 5750 ha. But non-certified organic cultivation area, 
assessments of which have not been done, is expected to be much more than this.  
 
6
Benefits of organic farming 
J Makes agriculture more rewarding, sustainable and respectable. 
J Sustains soil fertility by preventing the loss of soil and leaching of minerals. 
J Protects and enriches biodiversity - micro organisms, soil flora and fauna, plants and 
animals. 
J Requires less water and promotes water conservation. 
J Improves and maintains agro ecosystem and natural landscape for sustainable 
production. 
J Depends mostly on renewable on-farm resources.  
J Encourages consumption of renewable energy resources- mechanical and other 
alternate sources of fuel. 
J Includes domestic animals as an essential part of organic system which helps 
maintaining soil fertility and also increases the income of farmers.  
J Ensures pollution free air, water, soil, food and, natural ecosystems. 
J Improves agro-biodiversity (both varieties and crops). 
J Protects and enhances traditional knowledge in farming, processing and seed 
improvement leading to its protection for the future generations. 
J Reduces the cost of production through locally suitable methods and inputs. 
J Produces adequate quantity of nutritious, wholesome and best quality food and 
develops a healthy food culture. 
J Reduces the food - mileage and, thereby, carbon emission. 
The State Government have seized of the importance of organic farming and, realized 
the health hazards and un-sustainability of chemical farming as it clearly states in its 
Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan that the state has to have an organic farming policy 
to protect its rich biodiversity and thus sustain various livelihoods dependent on this 
precious resource. 
Organic Farming Policy, Strategy and Action Plan 
 
Objectives  
1. Make farming sustainable, remunerative and respectable.  
2. Enhance natural soil fertility and productivity.  
3. Ensure soil and water conservation.  
 
7
4. Ensure agricultural bio-security and food and nutritional security.  
5. Create and ensure domestic market for organic products controlled by the farmers.  
6. Avoid the use of agrochemicals and other hazardous material and, ensure chemical - 
free water, soil, air and food.  
7. Ensure seed, food and sovereignty.  
8. Promote biodiversity based ecological farming.   
9. Ensure quality control in organic inputs and agricultural produce 
10. Enable human health promotion by providing safe agricultural  products and 
commodities  
11. Conservation and extension of traditional knowledge related to agriculture. 
FAO put the objectives succinctly:  "Organic agriculture improves food access by 
increasing productivity, diversity and conservation of natural resources, by raising 
incomes and by reducing risks for farmers. Improvement also results from sharing of 
knowledge among farmers. These benefits lead to poverty reduction and a reversal of rural 
outward migration. Policy requirements to improve food access include: increasing 
farmers’ rights to seeds, local varieties and biodiversity; expanding fair-trade systems 
along the full value chain; evaluating current emergency aid and procurement 
programmes; and strengthening the rights of indigenous farmers".  
Strategies and Action Plan 
General approach: The mission to convert Kerala into an organic State is to be 
achieved focusing on potential crops and areas in a phased and compact manner with the 
aim of converting  a minimum of 10% of the cultivable land into entirely organic every 
year and thus achieving the target within five to ten years. On completion of the third year 
of implementation of the organic farming policy, a Committee of experts comprising 
representatives of farmers and scientists should make a comprehensive assessment of the 
farmer’s well being, economy and environment and, only after rectifying the drawbacks, if 
any, can the policy be implemented in rest of the areas. 
Definition of organic farmer 
A farmer may be defined as 'Organic Farmer' provided he/she adherses to and practices 
the following three essentialities of organic farming. 
(1). a farmer who practices mixed farming  including food crops. 
(2).  a farmer who ensures the conservation of soil and water. 
(3).  a farmer who conserves the biodiversity of the farmland. 
 
8
Strategy 1 
Ensure seed sovereignty of the farmers and the State  
Action 
1.1  Establish seed villages exclusively for organic farming. 
1.1 (a)  Begin programmes for the production of seeds, seedlings, planting materials and, 
traditional animal breeds at the Panchayat level, so as to become self-sufficient in 
the availability of good quality local seeds, both indigenous and breeder seeds 
developed by the KAU and other institutions of agricultural research. 
1.1(b)  Begin at the farmers’ group levels, seed banks and seed cooperatives to produce, 
store, share and supply good quality seeds, including those which are traditional 
and location specific. 
1.1(c)  Promote farmers who can produce organically, good quality seeds and develop 
participatory seed production programmes along with the KAU and other 
institutions of agricultural research. 
1.1(d)  Develop storage facilities/protection measures using traditional methods 
1.2  Ensure maintenance of traceability chain mandatory at the Local Self Government 
Institution level by the Biodiversity Management Committees (BMC) with regard to 
seeds produced, sold, transferred and shared in the Panchayat to protect the farmers 
from spurious low quality seeds, including hazardous genetically modified seeds  
1.3  Declare and ensure Genetically Modified(GM) free villages/panchayats and State 
1.4  Establish a mechanism to regulate the prices of seeds 
1.5  Ensure supply of locally suitable seeds in each agro-climatic zone 
Strategy 2 
Implementation of organic farming policy in a phased manner 
Action 
2.1  Conduct an initial assessment of the status of organic farming and farmers in the State 
including cultivated, certified and non-cultivated wild organic areas in the State.  
2.2  Develop an action plan with an objective of converting  annual crops such as grains, 
fruits and vegetables to organic within five years and the perennial crops with in 10 
years. 
2.3  Develop a clear plan of action with budgets for incorporation into the planning process 
of the Local Self Government Institutions for phasing in organic farming in the State.  
 
9
2.4  Special thrust should be initially given to complex, diverse and risk prone areas such 
as rain-fed districts, drought-prone districts, food crop producing districts and tribal 
districts.  
2.5 All agricultural practices to be launched in the tribal belts of Kerala should 
compulsorily be organic. 
Strategy 3 
Compact Area Group approach in organic farming  
Action 
3.1  Encourage the formation of Organic farmers groups, especially women organic farmer 
groups, clubs, SHG’s and cooperatives for the purpose of cultivation, input production, 
seed/seedlings/planting materials production, certification and marketing.  
3.2  Each group should be of a minimum five members (as stipulated under the 
Participatory Guarantee System of Certification)  
3.3  Models such as Vegetable and Fruit Promotion Council of Kerala (VFPCK), 
Maarappanmoola Cooperative Society, Adat Cooperative Society for paddy, 
GALASA, Compact Area Group approach of Kannore KVK, Harithasree may be 
adopted.  
3.4  Encourage Kudumbasree, Vanasamrakshana Samithi, Theera SVS, Grama Haritha 
Samithi to develop organic farming enterprises 
Strategy 4  
Strengthen soil and ensure water conservation measures  
Action 
4.1 Declare the existing sacred groves, ponds and mangroves as protected areas and ensure 
their conservation. 
4.2  Ensure organic farming approach in all the watershed development areas and extend 
support including capacity building and financial assistance for soil and water 
conservation measures through ongoing watershed development programmes.  
4.3  Integrate the various institutions presently involved in watershed management and 
introduce organic farming as a key component.  
4.4  Adopt appropriate agronomic practices suitable to the agro-ecological conditions as 
well as the topographical conditions at the micro watershed level and, 
discourage/restrict inappropriate crops and cropping practices.  
 
10
4.5  Kerala Agricultural University and other research institutions should develop suitable 
crop combinations and locally suitable technology, through participatory research with 
farmers.  
4.6  Encourage landowners and part-time farmers by providing adequate financial support 
to utilize their lands for organic farming, if left unutilized. 
4.7  Formulate legislative measures to rejuvenate and protect traditional water resources 
including fresh water lakes, surangas and ensure rain water conservation, restriction of 
bore wells, especially in dark zones and recharging of existing bore wells, open wells 
and ponds, and other conservation measures so as to improve ground water table and 
also conserve top soil.  
4.8  Establish testing facilities for soil, water, micronutrients and microorganisms at least at 
the block and introduce the system of providing Soil Health Cards.  
4.9  Promote bio-fencing and thus help ensure soil and water conservation and, availability 
of green manure and green leaf manure 
4.10 Conduct training programmes for resource persons at the Local Self Government 
Institution level on soil and water conservation measures 
4.11 Avoid use of plastics in agricultural practices.  Coir and other natural fibres should be 
encouraged to prepare shade  for nurseries and flower farming. 
Strategy 5 
Promote a mixed farming approach for livelihood security and ecological 
sustainability  
Action 
5.1  Make crop-livestock (including poultry) integrated farming as part of organic farming, 
with women centered ownership and management in the farmer households and 
groups. Emphasis may be given to Kerala’s traditional farming approach of integrated 
farming of dominantly coconut with cattle and poultry.  
5.2  Develop Bee-keeping, fisheries, duckeries and similar enterprises as part of the mixed 
farming programme.  
5.3  Promote decentralized production of livestock feed from locally available resources, 
but excluding spurious ingredients such as growth promoters and hormones.  
5.4  Document and popularise traditional knowledge related to animal health care.  
5.5  Develop linkages between organic farmers and livestock growing farmers for 
exchange of manure for fodder.   
 
11
5.6  Encourage mixed cropping of indigenous trees and medicinal plants through organic 
farming.  
5.7  Promote proven and successful practices developed by farmers. 
5.8  Tax relaxation shall be given to the land holding with maximum forest and wild trees. 
Strategy 6 
Conserve and improve agro-biodiversity and undomesticated biodiversity 
Action 
6.1  Document agro-biodiversity and related traditional knowledge and practice, both 
cultivated and un-cultivated, in each Panchayat.  
6.2  Encouragement in the form of financial support may be given for the establishment of 
model agro-biodiversity conservation farms.  
6.3  Develop programmes for farmers to collect, purify and multiply traditional seeds.  
6.4  Encourage protection of traditional agricultural systems such as Kaipad, Pokkali and 
Kole and Kuttanad as "agricultural heritage of Kerala" 
6.5  Promote indigenous rice varieties such as navara, jeerakasala and gandhakasala and 
also other traditional indigenous varieties of crops. 
Strategy 7  
Launch a state-wide intensive campaign on   organic farming in the form of a 
popular movement: "Jaiva Keralam"  
Action 
7.1  Organise Organic Mela’s in all districts.  
7.2  Begin state-wide awareness programmes for the promotion of organic farming 
focusing on the advantages of organic produce and harmful effects of chemical-based 
farming.  
7.3  Produce handouts, publications of case-studies and best practices, video films, posters 
and other awareness materials to reach out to all sections, especially women.  
7.4  Organize workshops, seminars and exchange programmes for consumers, teachers, 
traders, farmers, government and semi-government officials in the related area.  
7.5  Ensure the strict enforcement of the provisions of the Food Adulteration Act, 1954, 
and rules 1955, and bring suitable legislations to notify and enable Agriculture 
Officers, Veterinary Doctors and similar professionals as Inspectors under the Act and 
also establish quality and adulteration testing facilities at district level.  
 
12
7.6  Encourage setting up of organic kitchen gardens, organic orchards in urban and rural 
households.  
Strategy 8 
Ensure availability of quality organic manure to the farmers 
Action 
8.1  Encourage, with adequate support, the availability of biomass in the organic farm 
itself, through programmes such as crop rotation, tree crops, cover crops, leguminous 
crops, green manure and green leaf manure.  
8.2  Provide support for cow, buffalo, duck, fish, poultry and goat, preferably traditional 
breeds, to organic farmers/groups to ensure integrated farming and the availability of 
farmyard manure and urine. 
8.3 Required changes in the exisiting Cattle Breeding Policy may be made to ensure 
availability of indigenous varities of cow and bufallow to the organic farmers.  
8.4  Encourage the production of various types of compost in the farm itself, including 
vermi-composting and biogas slurry.  
8.5  Formulate special programmes for increasing the biomass and organic manures, 
especially in rain-fed cultivation areas where soil depletion is high, so as to drought 
proof the farm. 
8.6  Encourage indigenous species of earthworms and effective microorganisms in 
composting. 
8.7  Establish a decentralized system to produce organic manure from biodegradable 
organic waste segregated at source.  
8.8  Ensure the quality of the organic manure and establish a centralized testing laboratory 
to monitor the same. 
8.9  Discourage burning of all organic materials in the field, which could be utilized as 
manure. 
8.10 Under the leadership of the "Padasekhara Samithi" and other farmer groups draw the 
benefits of the provisions of the National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme to 
ensure production of green leaves and extraction of silt from the rural ponds, tanks, 
reservoirs, streams and rivulets for augmenting the fertility of the farm lands. 
 
13
Strategy 9 
Ensure farm inputs for organic farming  
Action 
9.1  Implement programmes for the production of seeds, seedlings and other planting 
materials, manure, plant protection materials at the farm with the help of agriculture 
department, Agricultural university, at local level.  
9.2  Encourage 
Farmers 
Associations/Clubs/Cooperatives/Companies 
of 
farmers, 
SHG’s/Youth groups at the local level to produce need based farm inputs.  
9.3  Link organic municipal solid waste segregated at source, especially from markets, 
hostels, densely populated areas and other institutions including night soils to farms 
through such means as simple and cost-effective decentralised composting, 
biogasification and  vermi-composting and thus ensure organic matter recycling. 
Organic waste treatment plant should be made compulsory for the flats. 
9.4  Conduct training programmes for local resource persons for producing good quality 
input, quality testing and for such related aspects at the Local Self Government 
Institution level.  
9.5  Formulate legislative measures to empower the Local Self Government Institutions, 
reputed NGO’s for ensuring quality of inputs, including necessary rules, guidelines, 
standards, monitoring and testing procedures and establishment of laboratories. 
9.6  Establish special financial assistance schemes, and/or link existing support schemes to 
groups to start production facilities for farm inputs.  
9.7  Develop local linkages for low cost input materials to farmers and ensure markets for 
good quality input materials at reasonable price 
9.8  Steps may be taken to formulate the organic farming packages developed by the 
Agricultural University in collaboration with organic farmers. Priority may be given 
for crops like banana, ginger, pine apple, vegetables, pepper, cardamom, paddy etc. 
9.9  Prepare a database on the organic content of the soil in different zones of Kerala. 
9.10  Ensure the quality of fruits and vegetables coming from other states. 
Strategy 10  
Capacity Building for farmers, implementing officers, agencies, and local self- 
government members  
Action 
10.1  Conduct orientation, training and exposure visit programmes.  
 
14
10.2  Group of 10-20 unemployed youth in each Panchayat (50% women) in the model of 
kudumbasree would be designated as "Karshaka Sevakar", trained in all facets of 
organic farm management supported through Local Self Government Institution 
programmes to assist farmers in organic farming.  
10.3  Develop the existing Agro-clinics of the Department of Agriculture into Organic 
Farming Resource Centres and the staff should be given training on organic farming.  
10.4  Create awareness on organic farming practices among the agriculture officers in the 
Agriculture Department. 
Strategy 11  
Develop Model Sustainable Organic Farms in the State 
Action 
11.1  Every Local Self Government Institution would develop model organic farms in 
select farmers’ fields.   
11.2  Research Stations in each agro-ecological zones under the KAU and other 
agricultural institutions should be converted to organic management systems, and 
thus become a field study centre for students, farmers and peoples’ representatives. 
11.3 Such farming areas could be made as part of the responsible tourism programme. 
Strategy 12 
Ensure and improve the health and wellbeing of the tribal through special tribal 
agriculture programmes.  
Action 
12.1  Ensure adequate nutritional food availability for tribals, whose traditional agriculture 
has been degraded.  
12.2  Develop specific programmes for the rejuvenation of their traditional agriculture and 
knowledge protection.  
12.3  Ensure sustainable collection of minor forest produce and facilitate the fair marketing 
of these produce through organic outlets.  
12.4  Formulate specific schemes to provide tribal children with their traditional food at 
least once in a day.  
12.5  Develop village (ooru) level seed banks of their traditional crops and medicinal 
plants.  
12.6  Integrate watershed programmes, NREG etc in the rejuvenation of tribal agriculture.  
 
 
15
Strategy 13 
Establish Producer Companies promoted by organic farmers 
Action 
13.1  Facilitate establishment of Organic Farmer Producer Companies or similar concerns 
as an organic farmers promoted enterprise with share investment by the organic 
farmers and the LSGs 
Strategy 14 
Establish storage and transportation facilities  
Action  
14.1  Establish separate and decentralized storage facilities for organic farm produce to 
ensure its organic integrity and help farmers in certification processes.  
14.2  Provide separate local transportation facilities for organic produce to nearby domestic 
markets. 
Strategy 15 
Promote farm level processing, value addition and encourage the use of organic farm 
produce in food industry  
Action 
15.1  Encourage farm processing by farmers groups, SHGs and Farmer Producer 
Companies for value addition.  
15.2  Ensure value addition does not compromise organic produce quality by facilitating 
testing and evaluation of processes with help from KAU and other research 
institutions.  
15.3  Encourage organic food-based industry in Kerala to procure and use organic produce 
in their products.  
15.4  Set up food industries at manageable decentralised levels in the State with special 
incentive packages.  
Strategy 16 
Develop diverse channels for marketing of organic produce  
Action  
16.1  Set up separate markets/facilities for organic produce certified by the PGS process 
through the existing channels of marketing of Agriculture products such as the 
Milma, Supplyco, Horti-corp, Haritha and People’s Market. 
 
16
16.2  Encourage direct marketing/linkages by farmers groups with end user institutions 
such as schools, hostels, hotels, hospitals, Ayurveda centres, SHG’s making food 
products and food-based industries in the State.  
16.3  Encourage institutions such as schools, hostels, hospitals and government institutions 
to procure local organic produce following rules and specific guidelines.  
16.4  Disallow large private retail corporations through suitable legislations.  
16.5  Encourage existing vegetable, fruits and grocery vendors to promote organic products 
16.6  Facilitate the establishment of organic farm produce outlets in all the districts, with 
the help of Governmental and Non governmental organizations.  
16.7  Ensure that the tourism industry, through the Responsible Tourism Initiative, source 
organic produce from local producers as much as possible for their hotels and resorts.  
Strategy 17 
Develop a simple certification process in the State for all organic farmers  
Action 
17.1  Encourage through specific scheme the implementation of an internal control system 
for organic farmer group.  
17.2  Encourage the Participatory Guarantee System of Certification for small and 
marginal farmers to supply to the domestic market.  
17.3 NGOs accredited by the PGS Council of India shall be authorised to help implement 
and monitor the PGS system in the State  
17.4  The State will develop an Organic Kerala Certification and a logo and, "Jaiva 
Keralam"   shall be developed as a brand. Since each country is following different 
norms, crops aimed at export may go for third party certification. 
17.5   Fix local standards for quality testing and certification. 
17.6  Ensure that every organic farmer who is doing organic farming for three years is 
given the certificate free of cost. 
17.7  Include organic livestock rearing, (Animal husbandry) in the certification system 
 
17
Strategy 18 
Provide financial incentives for promoting organic farming  
Action  
18.1  Provide interest-free loans to organic farmers, especially small and marginal farmers. 
Credits linked to banks shall be subsidized through Central/State Governments.  
18.2  Set in place production linked incentive system supports. 
18.3  Promote revolving funds system. 
18.4  Provide assistance during conversion period; two years for annual crops and three 
years for perennials. 
18.5  Introduce a State led insurance scheme for small and marginal organic farmers  
18.6  Introduce pension for organic farmers. 
Strategy 19  
Encourage the use of renewable energy sources  
Action 
19.1  Assistance in terms of expertise and finances should be given for use of biogas 
plants, solar energy and wind energy units wherever feasible to reduce dependence 
on external energy sources.  
19.2  Develop appropriate small farm machinery for reducing energy, cost and drudgery  
Strategy 20 
 
Introduce organic farming in education institutions 
Action 
20.1  Introduce organic farming in educational institutions, prisons and juvenile homes, 
through academic inputs. A specific campaign shall be started among students to 
ensure that they take organically grown food.  
20.2  Set up a system in all schools in Kerala to have organic vegetable and fruit gardens as 
well as paddy, in potential regions, as part of inculcating among the children the love 
for organic farming and biodiversity conservation and, perpetuation in their 
households. Necessary support schemes may be formulated and implemented through 
the Local Self Government Institutions. 
20.3  Encourage schools to have seed banks and seed farms in the premises, wherever 
feasible, to produce and supply good quality seeds for the use in their nearby regions.  
 
18
20.4  Promote children-farmer interfaces in each school, which shall include visits to 
organic farms.  
20.5  Encourage schools to link with organic farmers for supply of rice, vegetables, fruits, 
pulses, milk, egg and honey as part of the noon-meal and nutritional supplement 
programmes. The ICDS can also be encouraged to supply organic food processed and 
prepared through SHG’s for the Anganwadi’s.  
20.6  Provide suitable incentives to baby food industries that use organic inputs and 
processes.  
20.7  Develop a curriculum for school students on organic farming. 
20.8  Publicity through the Farm Information Bureau. 
Strategy21 
Reorient Research, Education and Extension  
Action 
21.1  The KAU would set up a special multi-institutional special task force to re-orient the 
Research, Education and Extension systems to support the Organic Farming Policy 
and the transition of the State’s agriculture to organic farming.  
21.2  The KAU shall develop package of practices and model demonstration farms for 
organic farming in different agro-ecological zones.  
21.3  Introduce as part of the course curriculum, both at under and post graduate levels, 
interactions with leading organic farmers, groups and NGO’s promoting organic 
farming in the state.  
21.4  Develop participatory research programmes with organic farmers on all aspects of 
organic farming, ensuring a monthly remuneration for the farmers of the participatory 
research programme. 
21.5  Research and inventories so as to recognize and document existing practices of 
organic farmers.  
21.6  Identify and screen native livestock/fish breeds which are locally adaptable and 
resistant to parasites and diseases.   
21.7  Develop herbal remedies for control of diseases and pests of livestock/ crops/ fish.  
21.8  To institutionalise the above, an Organic Farming Research Institute (OFRI) may be   
set up.  
 
 
19
Strategy 22 
Phase out Chemical Pesticides and Fertilizers from the farming sector  
Action 
22.1  Ensure phased restriction/ban of sale and use of chemical agricultural inputs such as 
fertilizers, pesticides, fungicides and weedicides parallel to the implementation of the 
organic farming policy in the region.  
22.2  Through necessary legislation stop the sale and use of the highly toxic Class-1a and 
1b pesticides as a preliminary step.  
22.3  Declare and maintain ecologically sensitive areas with rich biodiversity and natural 
resource base (e.g. water bodies), as Chemical Pesticide and Fertilizer-Free Zones.  
22.4  Regulate the sale and use of pesticide through necessary legislations, enforcing a 
prescription based system ensuring that pesticides are sold only on a case-to-case 
basis after obtaining prescription from the Agriculture Officer.  
22.5  Strictly prohibit the sale of pesticides to children, pregnant women and non-farmers  
22.6  Generate a database on the non-agricultural use of pesticides (e.g.: household, 
storage, food processing, construction) and regulate its sale and use.  
22.7  Review and regulate promotional activities and advertisements of pesticides as 
per the FAO Code of Conduct and Guidelines for Pesticide Use.  
22.8  Conduct periodical analysis of water, soil, milk and crops at the district level where 
pesticides continue to be used and the data made public.  
22.9  Precautionary measures should be taken before using exotic organisms for biocontrol 
programmes. 
Strategy 23 
Integrate the programmes and activities of various departments, local self-
governments and organizations 
Action  
23.1  Integrate the various government departments, institutions, civil societies, and their 
schemes in a harmonious manner duly considering organic farming principles and 
local situations. These include government departments such as Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry, Forest, Fisheries, Local Bodies, Finance, Revenue, Industries, Tribal, 
Khadi and Village Industries; Financial Institutions, State Corperation Department; 
institutions, such as Kerala Agriculture University, ICAR institutions in the state; 
Commodity Boards for Spices, Coffee, Tea, Coconut and Rubber; APEDA, MILMA 
 
20
and other milk marketing societies; Farmers’ Organisations and Societies, Self Help 
Groups; Organic Farming Associations and, NGOs promoting organic farming 
Strategy 24 
Organisational set-up for promotion of organic farming  
Action 
24.1  Set up an Organic Kerala Mission to implement the organic farming policy, strategy 
and action plan and ensure their success. Since the coordination of the various 
departments is vital for the some, a General Council to be chaired by the Honourable 
Chief Minister and, since the policy has to be implemented by the Agricultural 
Department, an Executive Committee to be chaired by the Honourable Minister for 
Agriculture will supervise and guide the functioning of Organic Kerala Mission. 
 
General Council: 
Honourable Chief Minister 
- 
Chairman 
Honourable Minister for Agriculture 
-  Vice Chairman  
Honourable Minister for Fisheries 
- 
Member 
 
Honourable Minister for Animal Husbandry 
- 
Member 
Honourable Minister for Local Self Governance 
- 
Member 
Honourable Minister for Finance 
-  Member 
Agriculture Development Commissioner 
- 
Member 
Secretary, Agriculture Department 
- 
Convenor 
Presidents of District Organic Farming Societies 
- 
14 Members 
Representative of the Kerala Agricultural University 
- 
1 
‘’ 
Representative of the Agricultural Department 
- 
2 
‘’ 
Representatives of research institutions 
- 
3 
‘’ 
Representatives of line departments 
-  6  
‘’ 
(Fisheries, Animal husbandry, Local Self Government, Finance, Forest and Directorate  
of Indigenous Medicine) 
Plantation Corporation - Managing Director 
- 
 
‘’ 
Spices Board – Chairman 
- 
 
‘’ 
Tea Board – Chairman 
- 
 
‘’ 
Coffee Board – Chairman 
- 
 
‘’ 
 
21
Rubber Board – Chairman 
- 
 
‘’ 
Coconut Development Board – Chairman 
- 
 
‘’ 
Kerala State Agricultural Prices Board – Chairman 
- 
 
‘’ 
Representatives of NGOs working in the field of agriculture (to be nominated by the Govt.) 
Kerala State Biodiversity Board – Chairman 
- 
 
‘’ 
Additional Director, Soil Survey, Conservation Department  
-   
‘’ 
Chief Engineer, Irrigation Department  
-   
‘’ 
Director, State Horticulture Mission  
-   
‘’ 
C.E.O., Vegetable and Fruit Promotion Council  
-   
‘’ 
Representative of the Planning Board 
-   1 
‘’ 
 
Executive Committee:  
Hon. Minister for Agriculture 
-  
Chairman 
Secretary, Department of Agriculture 
- 
Member 
Secretary, Department of Animal Husbandry 
- 
Member 
Secretary, Department of Fisheries 
- 
Member 
Secretary, Department of Local Self Government 
- 
Member 
Chairman, Kerala State Biodiversity Board 
- 
Member 
Director, Department of Agriculture 
- 
Convenor 
Representatives of Kerala Agriculture University 
- 
Member 
Director, Animal Husbandry 
- 
Member 
Director, Fisheries 
- 
Member 
Director, Department of Ayurveda, Traditional Medicines  - 
Member 
Representative, Kerala State Planning Board 
- 
Member 
Representative of organic farmers  
-  
2 Members 
Representative of NGOs working in the field 
-  
2 Members 
      of organic farming 
  
 
22
KERALA STATE ORGA3IC FARMI3G POLICY, 
STRATEGY A3D ACTIO3 PLA3  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVER3ME3T OF KERALA 
2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture (P.B.) Department 
G.O.(P) No. 39/2010/Agri.   
 
Thiruvananthapuram, 2010 February 10 
 
23
Contents 
Vision 
1 
Background  
1 
A brief history of organic farming  
4 
Benefits of organic farming 
6 
Organic Farming Policy, Strategy and Action Plan  
6 
Objectives  
6 
Strategies and Action Plan 
7  
Definition of organic farmer 
7  
Strategy 1 
 
Ensure seed sovereignty of the farmers and the State 
8 
Strategy 2 
 
Implementation of organic farming policy in a phased manner 
8 
Strategy 3 
 
Compact Area Group approach in organic farming 
9 
Strategy 4  
 
Strengthen soil and ensure water conservation measures 
9 
Strategy 5 
 
Promote a mixed farming approach for livelihood  
10
 
security and ecological sustainability  
Strategy 6 
 
Conserve and improve agro-biodiversity and undomesticated biodiversity 
11 
Strategy 7  
 
Launch a state-wide intensive campaign on organic farming in the form of a  
11
 
popular movement: "Jaiva Keralam"  
Strategy 8 
 
Ensure availability of quality organic manure to the farmers 
12 
Strategy 9 
 
 Ensure farm inputs for organic farming 
13 
Strategy 10  
 Capacity Building for farmers, implementing officers, agencies, and local self- 
13 
 government members  
 
 
24
Strategy 11  
 
Develop Model Sustainable Organic Farms in the State  
14 
Strategy 12 
 
Ensure and improve the health and wellbeing of the tribal through special tribal  14
 
 agriculture programmes.  
Strategy 13 
 
Establish Producer Companies promoted by organic farmers 
15 
Strategy 14 
 
Establish storage and transportation facilities  
15 
Strategy 15 
 
Promote farm level processing, value addition and encourage the use of  
15 
 
organic farm produce in food industry  
Strategy 16 
 
Develop diverse channels for marketing of organic produce  
15 
Strategy 17 
 
Develop a simple certification process in the State for all organic farmers 
16 
Strategy 18 
 
Provide financial incentives for promoting organic farming  
17 
Strategy 19  
 
Encourage the use of renewable energy sources  
17 
Strategy 20 
 
Introduce organic farming in education institutions 
17 
Strategy 21 
 
Reorient Research, Education and Extension 
18 
Strategy 22 
 
Phase out Chemical Pesticides and Fertilizers from the farming sector 
19 
Strategy 23 
         Integrate the programmes and activities of various departments, local  
19 
 
self-governments and organizations  
Strategy 24 
 
Organisational set-up for promotion of organic farming  
20 
General Council 
20 
Executive Committee 
21 
